The Garlands on His Brow
Fame has but a fleeting hold
on the reins in our fast-paced society;
so many of yesterday’s
heroes crumble.
Shortly after my return from England, I was walking down the main road of my old home town of
Dehra, gazing at the shops and passers-by to see what changes, if any, had taken place during my
absence. I had been away three years. Still a boy when I went abroad, I was twenty-one when I
returned with some mediocre qualifications to flaunt in the faces of my envious friends. (I did not tell
them of the loneliness of those years in exile; it would not have impressed them). I was nearing the
clock tower when I met a beggar coming from the opposite directon. In one respect, Dehra had not
changed. The beggars were as numerous as ever, though I must admit they looked healthier.
This beggar had a straggling beard, a hunch, a cavernous chest, and unsteady legs on which a
number of purple sores were festering. His shoulders looked as though they had once been powerful,
and his hands thrusting a begging-bowl at me, were still strong.
He did not seem sufficiently decrepit to deserve of my charity, and I was turning away when I
thought I discerned a gleam of recognition in his eyes. There was something slightly familiar about the
man; perhaps he was a beggar who remembered me from earlier years. He was even attempting a
smile; showing me a few broken yellow fangs; and to get away from him, I produced a coin, dropped
it in his bowl, and hurried away.
I had gone about a hundred yards when, with a rush of memory, I knew the identity of the beggar.
He was the hero of my childhood, Hassan, the most magnificent wrestler in the entire district.
I turned and retraced my steps, half hoping I wouldn’t be able to catch up with the man; and he had
indeed been lost in the bazaar crowd. Well, I would doubtless be confronted by him again in a day or
two … Leaving the road, I went into the Municipal gardens and stretching myself out on the fresh
green February grass, allowed my memory to journey back to the days when I was a boy of ten, full of
health and optimism, when my wonder at the great game of living had yet to give way to
disillusionment at its shabbiness.
On those precious days when I played truant from school — and I would have learnt more had I
played truant more often— I would sometimes make my way to the akhara at the corner of the
gardens to watch the wrestling-pit. My chin cupped in my hands, I would lean against a railing and
gaze in awe at their rippling muscles, applauding with the other watchers whenever one of the
wrestlers made a particularly clever move or pinned an opponent down on his back.
Amongst these wrestlers the most impressive and engaging young man was Hassan, the son of a
kite-maker. He had a magnificent build, with great wide shoulders and powerful legs, and what he
lacked in skill he made up for in sheer animal strength and vigour. The idol of all small boys, he was
followed about by large numbers of us, and I was a particular favourite of his. He would offer to lift
me on to his shoulders and carry me across the akhara to introduce me to his friends and fellowwrestlers.
From being Dehra’s champion, Hassan soon became the outstanding representative of his art in the
entire district. His technique improved, he began using his brain in addition to his brawn, and it was
said by everyone that he had the making of a national champion.
It was during a large fair towards the end of the rains that destiny took a hand in the shaping of his
life. The Rani of—was visiting the fair, and she stopped to watch the wrestling bouts. When she saw
Hassan stripped and in the ring, she began to take more than a casual interest in him. It has been said
that she was a woman of a passionate and amoral nature, who could not be satisfied by her weak and
ailing husband. She was struck by Hassan’s perfect manhood, and through an official offered him the
post of her personal bodyguard.
The Rani was rich and, in spite of having passed her fortieth summer, was a warm and attractive
woman. Hassan did not find it difficult to make love according to the bidding, and on the whole he
was happy in her service. True, he did not wrestle as often as in the past; but when he did enter a
competition, his reputation and his physique combined to overawe his opponents, and they did not put
up much resistance. One or two well-known wrestlers were invited to the district. The Rani paid
them liberally, and they permitted Hassan to throw them out of the ring. Life in the Rani’s house was
comfortable and easy, and Hassan, a simple man, felt himself secure. And it is to the credit of the
Rani (and also of Hassan) that she did not tire of him as quickly as she had of others.
But Ranis, like washerwomen, are mortal; and when a longstanding and neglected disease at last
took its toll, robbing her at once of all her beauty, she no longer struggled against it, but allowed it to
poison and consume her once magnificent body.
It would be wrong to say that Hassan was heart-broken when she died. He was not a deeply
emotional or sensitive person. Though he could attract the sympathy of others, he had difficulty in
producing any of his own. His was a kindly but not compassionate nature.
He had served the Rani well, and what he was most aware of now was that he was without a job
and without any money. The Raja had his own personal amusements and did not want a wrestler who
was beginning to sag a little about the waist.
Times had changed. Hassan’s father was dead, and there was no longer a living to be had from
making kites; so Hassan returned to doing what he had always done: wrestling. But there was no
money to be made at the akhara. It was only in the professional arena that a decent living could be
made. And so, when a travelling circus of professionals — a Negro, a Russian, a Cockney-Chinese
and a giant Sikh — came to town and offered a hundred rupees and a contract to the challenger who
could stay five minutes in the ring with any one of them, Hassan took up the challenge.
He was pitted against the Russian, a bear of a man, who wore a black mask across his eyes; and in
two minutes Hassan’s Dehra supporters saw their hero slung about the ring, licked in the head and
groin, and finally flung unceremoniously through the ropes.
After this humiliation, Hassan did not venture into competitive bouts again. I saw him sometimes at
the akhara, where he made a few rupees giving lessons to children. He had a paunch, and folds were
beginning to accumulate beneath his chin. I was no longer a small boy, but he always had a smile and
a hearty back-slap reserved for me.
I remember seeing him a few days before I went abroad. He was moving heavily about the akhara;
he had lost the lightning swiftness that had once made him invincible. Yes, I told myself.
The garlands wither on your brow;
Then boast no more your mighty deeds …
That had been over three years ago. And for Hassan to have been reduced to begging was indeed a
sad reflection of both the passing of time and the changing times. Fifty years ago a popular local
wrestler would never have been allowed to fall into a state of poverty and neglect. He would have
been fed by his old friends and stories would have been told of his legendary prowess. He would not
have been forgotten. But those were more leisurely times, when the individual had his place in
society, when a man was praised for his past achievements and his failures were tolerated and
forgiven. But life had since become fast and cruel and unreflective, and people were too busy
counting their gains to bother about the idols of their youth.
It was a few days after my last encounter with Hassan that I found a small crowd gathered at the
side of the road, not far from the clock tower. They were staring impassively at something in the
drain, at the same time keeping at a discreet distance. Joining the group, I saw that the object of their
disinterested curiosity was a corpse, its head hidden under a culvert, legs protruding into the open
drain. It looked as though the man had crawled into the drain to die, and had done so with his head in
the culvert so the world would not witness his last unavailing struggle.
When the municipal workers came in their van, and lifted the body out of the gutter, a cloud of flies
and bluebottles rose from the corpse with an angry buzz of protest. The face was muddy, but I
recognized the beggar who was Hassan.
In a way, it was a consolation to know that he had been forgotten, that no one present could
recognize the remains of the man who had once looked like a young God. I did not come forward to
identify the body. Perhaps I saved Hassan from one final humiliation.
